## Handling State in Functional Programming

It is rather difficult to talk about something as basic as state in functional programming, especially when you have an imperative background. This chapter is the attempt to give some guidance. Please note that I am going to use the following terminology:

* state for mutable state
* data for immutable state

This is merely for convenience.

### Definition of state

State is data that changes over the runtime of a program. In imperative programming you usually get state either by reassigning a variable

```javascript
let x = 1; // data
x = x + 1; // state
```
or by mutating a reference value.

```javascript
const o = {foo: true}; // data
o.foo = false; // state
```
Both operations constitute state, but it is still important to make this distinction, because both kinds of state are handled by different means in functional programming.

### Why state is harmful

State is a side effect that introduces implicit time and thus a lot of complexity to your program. In such an environment it may matter how often a synchronous function is called or which asynchronous functions yields its result first. This has the following consequences:

* implicit time gives rise to race conditions (caused by asynchronous computations in Javascript's event loop)
* implicit time renders more functions non-idempotent (`f(x) ≠ f(f(x))`)
* implicit time breaks substitutability (`f(x) op f(x) ≠ y op y` where `op` is any operator and `y` is `f(x)`'s result value)

Losing these properties has far-reaching consequences on your functional programming experience. Side effects hamper

* parallelization
* local reasoning
* equational reasoning

You can still make use of side effects but it is not functional programming anymore. The example below demonstrates a race condition in the context of asynchronous computations:

```javascript
const rand = () => Math.round(Math.random() * 100);

const incHead = xs => new Promise((res, rej) =>
  setTimeout(ys => {
    ys[0] = ys[0] + 1;
    res(ys);
  }, rand(), xs));

const sqrHead = xs => new Promise((res, rej) =>
  setTimeout(ys => {
    ys[0] = ys[0] * ys[0];
    res(ys);
  }, rand(), xs))

const state = [3];

const foo = incHead(state);

const bar = sqrHead(state);

Promise.all([foo, bar])
  .then(_ => console.log(state)); // yields either 10 or 16
```
[run code](https://repl.it/@scriptum/RaggedInfiniteGeneric)

Depending on the random numbers either `foo` or `bar` is completed first and the whole computation yields `10` and `16` respectively. Here is another example how side effects may affect the idempotent property of a function:

```javascript
const append = xs => ys =>
  (xs.push.apply(xs, ys), xs);

const xs = [1, 2]
  ys = [3, 4];

append(xs) (ys);
append(xs) (ys); // [1, 2, 3, 4, 3, 4]
```
And here is yet another example of side effects hampering substitution:

```javascript
const incHead = xs => (xs[0]++, xs);
const append = xs => ys => xs.concat(ys);

const xs = [3], ys = [3];

append(incHead(xs)) (incHead(xs)); // [5, 5]
incHead(ys); append(ys) (ys); // [4, 4]
```
### Variables and reassignments

Although the term variable is used in the functional paradigm and math I prefer to avoid it in this context, because it regularly causes confusion. There are no mutable variables in functional programming but only immutable name bindings, that is, you cannot rebind a new value to an existing name, unless you create a new scope.

There is a good reason why reassignments are banned in functional programming. They would violate referential transparency and thus introduce side effects, which render local and equational reasoning impossible:

```javascript
let y = 2;
const sub2 = x => x – y

sub2(2); // 0
y = 3;
sub2(2); // -1
```
The same expression within the same scope must yield the same value no matter when the runtime decides to actually evaluate this expression.

### References and mutations

The functional paradigm does not have a notion of references, because every expression must be referential transparent. References require the opposite, namely referential identity, which allows certain values to be distinguished by their reference and thus by their location in memory. Reference values have an identity:

```javascript
const o = {foo: true},
  p = {foo: true};

o !== p; // true
```
The expression above compares two references. In a referential transparent environment `o` and `p` are indistinguishable, because their values are exactly the same. In Javascript, however, both reference values are different, because their references are. While comparing two references in Javascript is common, it is still an impure operation. Only use it with caution and make it as explicit as possible.

### Handling reassignments in a functional way

If we are not allowed to reassign a variable with a new value, we need to create a new scope with the same name bound to the new value. Functions span a new scope and their argument names are bound to the values the function was called with. Function application is all it takes indeed. Every time you need a reassignment just call a function with the new value as its argument. If you know the number of reassignments upfront, you can manually create nested function calls. Here is a contrived example, which nevertheless illustrates the underlying principle:

```javascript
const app = f => x => f(x);
const sqr = x => x * x;

const main = init =>
  app(([x, xs]) =>
    app(([x, xs]) =>
      app(([x, xs]) => xs)
        ([sqr(x), [...xs, sqr(x)]]))
          ([sqr(x), [...xs, sqr(x)]]))
            ([sqr(init), [init, sqr(init)]]);

main(2); // [2, 4, 16, 256]
```
[run code](https://repl.it/@scriptum/FullFruitfulMacro)

In the given example none of the nested functions has access to name bindings of their parent scopes due to name shadowing. If a nested functions needs access to a previous name binding, you can easily rename the involved arguments. `app` is just an auxiliary function to avoid immediately invoked function expressions (IIFEs).

In a more dynamic setting the number of reassignments is not known at compile time, hence we need to resort to recursion:

```javascript
const arrUnfold = n => f => x =>
  n === 0
    ? []
    : [x].concat(arrUnfold(n - 1) (f) (f(x)));

const sqr = x => x * x;

const main = arrUnfold(5) (sqr); // A

main(2); // [2, 4, 16, 256, 65536]
```
[run code](https://repl.it/@scriptum/FewEachOptimization)

Line `A` indicates that the number of iterations is dynamic.

You can think of the functional approach as shifting state caused by reassignments to the function call stack, that is, to the arguments and return values of functions. Holding the state of an application is actually the very purpose of the call stack in the functional paradigm. It turns out that functions are tailor-made for this job.

#### Local bindings

Local bindings are basically an abstraction of immediately invoked function expressions and come in handy in various situations. Instead of creating an IIFE manually we use a combinator for convenience:

```javascript
const _let = f => f();

_let((x = 2 * 2, y = x * 2, z = y * 2) =>
  [x, y, z]); // [4, 8, 16]
```
Using local bindings we can make the example from the last section more efficient by evaluating the expression `sqr(init)` only once (line `A`):

```javascript
const _let = f => f();
const app = f => x => f(x);
const sqr = x => x * x;

const main = init =>
  _let((init_ = sqr(init)) =>
    app(([x, xs]) =>
      app(([x, xs]) =>
        app(([x, xs]) => xs)
          ([sqr(x), [...xs, sqr(x)]]))
            ([sqr(x), [...xs, sqr(x)]]))
              ([init_, [init, init_]])); // A

main(2); // [2, 4, 16, 256]
```
[run code](https://repl.it/@scriptum/SereneShinyListener)

#### Custom call stacks

We have learned that functional programming uses the function call stack to hold the state of an application. However, there are two scenarios where we cannot rely on the call stack anymore:

* tail recursive algorithms
* asynchronous computations

Tail recursion leads to elimination of the function call stack. Elimination is the very goal of this optimization, which we will examine in a later chapter of this course. When the call stack vanishes we need to provide an alternative structure to store state:

```javascript
const sum = xs => {
  const go = (acc, i) => // A
    i === xs.length
      ? acc
      : go(acc + xs[i], i + 1);

  return go(0, 0);
};

sum([1, 2, 3, 4, 5]); // 15
```
[run code](https://repl.it/@scriptum/ButteryMeanModels)

Tail recursion is often referred to as recursion accumulator-style, because the accumulator in line `A` serves as a proxy for the call stack and temporarily holds the state of the recursive algorithm.

Asynchronous functions cannot make use of the synchronous call stack, because all synchronous computations are already completed at the time of their invocation, that is, the original call stack is already unwound. Once again we need an alternative structure to hold the state of the asynchronous computation:

```javascript
const contComp = f => g => x => k =>
  g(x) (y => f(y) (k));

const contSqr = x => k => setTimeout(k, 0, `contSqr(${x})`);
const contInc = x => k => setTimeout(k, 0, `contInc(${x})`);
const log = x => console.log(`log(${x})`);

const main = contComp(contSqr) (contInc) (2); // A

// main isn't fully evaluated yet

main(log);
```
[run code](https://repl.it/@scriptum/SurefootedUnwrittenDecimals)

The example above is encoded in continuation passing style. CPS is hard to comprehend so take some time to get familiar with the the encoding. It is important to understand that line `A` evaluates to the nested function call `k => k(contSqr(contInc(2)))`. Such a function call tree requires a call stack to be evaluated. This is where the state of our asynchronous computation is hidden: It winds up its own "asynchronous" call stack.

#### Threading state through compositions

Stateful functions in FP usually have the shape `x => s => [x, s]`, where `x` is the current return value and `s` represents the current state. It can get quite laborious to thread state throughout our function compositions. Fortunately we can abstract from it by leveraging a few specialized combinators:

```javascript
const stateComp = f => g => x => s => {
  const [x_, s_] = g(x) (s);
  return f(x_) (s_);
};

const stateComp3 = f => g => h => x => s => {
  const [x_, s_] = h(x) (s),
    [x__, s__] = g(x_) (s_);

  return f(x__) (s__);
};

const stateLift = f => x => s => [f(x), s];
const stateMod = f => x => s => [x, f(x) (s)];

const id = x => x;
const _let = f => f();

const arrSnoc = x => xs =>
  xs.concat([x]);

const sqr = x => x * x;

const main = init =>
  _let(
    (stateSqr = stateComp(stateMod(arrSnoc)) (stateLift(sqr))) =>
      stateComp3(
        stateSqr)
          (stateSqr)
            (stateSqr)
              (init)
                ([init]));

main(2); // [256, [2, 4, 16, 256]]
```
[run code](https://repl.it/@scriptum/DesertedAttractiveBlockchain)

If we keep formalizing this pattern and add a couple of useful combinators, we will wind up with the state monad, which abstracts from state threading in a principled fashion. The functional paradigm knows other techniques to facilitate state handling, of course. We will cover these topics in subsequent chapters of this course.

### Handling mutations in a functional way

We still have not talked about mutations. The function call stack is useless in this regard. The naive way in a multi-paradigm language without purely functional data types is to copy reference types before they are passed to functions. This approach is quite inefficient though, especially for large data structures. In a subsequent chapter of this course I will introduce persistent data structures, which in essence provide an extremely efficient copy mechanism.

### Handling time-varying values in a functional way

There is actually another kind of stateful data that requires special handling: Time-varying values. They are created by recurring events and can either be modelled by event streams or by behaviors. Both topics are covered in later chapters of this course.

### Editor's note

If you enjoyed this chapter please 🌟 scriptum here on Github or share it on your preferred social media platform. If you found a mistake or inaccuracy or want to propose an improvement please file an issue/feature. Thank you.

[&lt; prev chapter](https://github.com/kongware/scriptum/blob/master/course/ch-001.md) | [TOC](https://github.com/kongware/scriptum#functional-programming-course-toc) | [next chapter &gt;](https://github.com/kongware/scriptum/blob/master/course/ch-003.md)
