## Lifting Pure Functions using Functor

A functor is a rather simple algebraic structure. The characteristic that renders it so elusive is its generality. Numerous very different data types can implement it. The `Functor` type class is one of the cornerstones of functional programming. It is a superclass of many other important type classes.

### Definition

A functor in the context of functional programming is an algebraic structure that has the following traits:

* it is an unary higher-order type constructor
* it is associated with a binary operation called map
* map must abide by the functor laws

This enumeration is not particularly helpful. Let us dig deeper.

### Algebraic structures

A functor is an algebraic structure, i.e. it comes from math. An algebraic structure consists of

* a set of entities
* one or more operations
* one or more axioms

Translated to the programming world an algebraic structure has

* instances for various types
* one or more associated functions or values under unique names
* one or more laws associated functions must abide by

### Term level

The actual programming with value constructors, functions, expressions and values takes place at the term level. It is complemented by the type level, where type constructors (parameterized types) and proper types exist.

First we will explore what constitutes a functor at the term level.

#### Map operation

Every functor has an associated `map` operation, which is a binary function:

```javascript
const map = f => tx => ???
```

But what does it exactly do? At the beginning of this chapter I mentioned that functors are so hard to grasp because they are so general. Consequently `map`'s operation is hard to describe in natural language without falling back to fuzzy metaphors. I will give it a shot in the following two sections.

#### Lift pure functions into a context

A functor lifts - there it is, the mentioned metaphor - an ordinary pure function into a context. Let us pretend within this section that a context is a container-like data structure, an `Array` for example. So a functor lifts an ordinary pure function into a container-like data structure:

```javascript
// binary map operation
const arrMap = f => xs =>
  xs.map(x => f(x));
  
// a pure function
const inc = n => n + 1;
  
arrMap(inc) ([1, 2, 3]); // [2, 3, 4]
```
[run code](https://repl.it/@scriptum/ThankfulTrickyLoaderprogram)

By supplying a `map` operation for each data type that implements functor, we can reuse pure functions for all container-like data structures. This is an enormous win in terms of code reuse.

However, functors do not stop at containers. They start with them.

#### What is an effectful context?

An effectful context can be almost everything, for example

* a data structure
* a prioritized choice
* a computation that may fail
* a computation with a read-only environment
* a computation with a write-only environment
* a stateful computation
* an asynchronous computation
* a lazy evaluated computation
* a computation that refies the rest of the application

There are many more. The fact that you can apply functors to so many effects and their corresponding types is what renders the concept so general and thus hard to grasp. We will examine each of the listed effects or rather their types in later chapters of this course.

Functors enable us to reuse ordinary pure functions in numerous different effectful contexts. As I have already mentioned this facilitates code reuse tremendously. Functors are ubiquitous in functional code and since the underlying mechanism is always the same, the code gets highly predictable.

We can roughly divide functorial contexts into two major categories:

* forming a structure
* causing an effect

The structure notion is obvious and is generally associated with functors. However, effectful notion forms the more extensive category. The distinction is helpful to categorize the variety of functors, but technically it is unnecessary. Functors are so general that they just do not care what they abstract from. Be it structures or effects, with functors we are able to treat them like ordinary values and them to pure functions, while the functor machinery takes care of the context. For the sake of simplicity we will use the term effectful or functorial context for both categories in this chapter.

#### Functor laws

These are the laws every functor instance must abide by:

```
= denotes equivalence
f/g denotes pure functions
tx denotes a pure value x in a functorial context t
id denotes the identity function
comp denotes function composition

map(id) (tx) ≡ tx // identity
map(comp(f) (g)) ≡ comp(map(f)) (map(g)) // composition
```
The first law states that a functor must only transform values, whereas the effectful context must remain untouched. The second one states that the `map` operation must be associative.

#### Context preserving

From the first functor law we can derive that functors have to be context preserving. A functor must transform the values in an effectful context but must not touch the context itself:

```javascript
[1, 2, 3] -- context preserving transformation --> [1, 4, 9]
[1, 2, 3] -- context preserving transformation --> [[1, 1], [2, 2], [3, 3]]

[1, 2, 3] -- invlaid transformation --> [1, 2, 3, 4]
[1, 2, 3] -- invalid transformation --> [3, 2, 1]
```
#### No escaping the functor

A functor must preserve the structure. From another perspective we can also say that it is not possible to escape the effectful context, at least not by means of the functor. You can define a getter or fold to retrieve the value inside the functorial context, of course, but this would be beyond the functor API. You would lose the benefit of the functor abstraction and probably information as well. And such an elimination of the functorial context would be specific to a the particular functor instance. You could not generalize it to be applicable for all functors.

This means when you have a value inside an effectful context, it is stuck in this context for the rest of your program. Since the very purpose of functors is to apply pure functions inside effectful contexts instead of retrieving the values, this behavior is actually desired. If the `Functor` type class would have an elimination rule as part of its API, it would be far less general.

#### Delimitation of side effects

An effectful context performs a specific effect on its value(s). This effect is not a side effect though, because it does not alter state. A side effect must always change some state by definition, either a variable in memory, a file on disk or the console on the screen. While we can easily avoid side effects in memory, every useful program must perform some sort of IO with the real world. We will examine how to achieve reliable and predictable IO operations in subsequent chapters of this course.

### Type level

At the type level a functor is a higher-order type constructor parameterized with a single type:

```
type Array<A>; // first-order type constructor (array type constructor)
type F<A>; // higher-order type constructor (can be specialized to array type constructor)
```
`F<A>` can represent a functor at the type level provided `F` has a functor contraint. `F` is the effectful context and `A` the value portion. Abstracting from the first-order type constructor is necessary, because a functor can be defined for various functorial contexts, not only for arrays.

Another important aspect is that the `Functor` type class demands unary type constructors. `F<A, B>` cannot be a functor, because it is parameterized with two types. However, just as with functions on the term level we can partially apply binary or higher-ary type constructors, i.e. `F<A, B>` can be a functor in `B`. If you apply `map` to such a type, it would only operate on `B` values and leave `A` values untouched.

Here is the hypothetical type of the overloaded `map` operation, provided Typescript would support higher-kinded types:

```
// hypothetical type
type map = <F, A, B>(f: (x: A) => B) => (tx: F<A>) => F<B>
```
The exact name of a functor in `B` is covariant functor. It is also possible to have a functor in `A` or in `A` and `B`, though. Such functors are called contravariant and invariant respectively. We will learn about contravariant and invariant functors in subsequent chapters of this course.

Let us compare functor lifting with normal function application to show the symmetry of both types:

```
<   A, B>(f: (x: A) => B) => ( x:   A ) =>   B  // function application
<F, A, B>(f: (x: A) => B) => (tx: F<A>) => F<B> // functor lifting
```
### Functorial context once again

We are still lacking an accurate definition of the functorial context without resorting to fuzzy metaphors. As programmers it is obvious to precisely define an abstract concept using only functions. For each effectful context there should be at least one or more associated functions which are fully polymorphic in the type parameter of the functor. Such functions must not transforms the values contained in a effectful context, because they must not not anything about these values. Why? Because such values can be of any type. As a consequence they can only operate on the contextual part of the functor and thus describe what this functorial context actually is:

```javascript
const len = xs => xs.length;

const head = def => xs =>
  xs.length === 0
    ? def
    : xs[0];

const reverse = xs => xs.reverse();
```
`len`, `head`, `reverse` et al. describe different aspects of the array context. With arrays you can rearrange values, you can leave individual values out or omit completely. If we follow this thought we can even claim that these functions constitute this very effectful context.

Last but not least it is noteworthy that a type may have more than one meaningful context and thus may have several functor declarations.

### `Option` instance

After all the theory it is time to demonstrate functorial lifting using specific instance implementations. The following instance lifts a pure function into a context that may fail without returning a result at all:

```javascript
// union constructors

const union = type => (tag, o) =>
  (o[type] = type, o.tag = tag.name || tag, o);

const match = (tx, o) =>
  o[tx.tag] (tx);

// OPTION

const Option = union("Option");

const None = Option("None", {});

const Some = some => Option(Some, {some});

// Functor

const optMap = f => tx =>
  match(tx, {
    None: _ => None,
    Some: ({some: x}) => Some(f(x))
  });

// auxiliary function

const sqr = x => x * x;

// MAIN

const tx = Some(5),
  ty = None;

optMap(sqr) (tx); // Some(25);
optMap(sqr) (ty); // None;
```
[run code](https://repl.it/@scriptum/SpeedyRealArchives)

### `Task` instance

This instance lifts a pure function into the context of asynchronous computations:

```javascript
// record constructor

const record = (type, o) =>
  (o[type.name || type] = type.name || type, o);

// TASK

const Task = task => record(
  Task,
  thisify(o => {
    o.task = (res, rej) =>
      task(x => {
        o.task = k => k(x);
        return res(x);
      }, rej);
    
    return o;
  }));

// Functor

const taskMap = f => tx =>
  Task((res, rej) =>
    tx.task(x => res(f(x)), rej));

// auxiliary function

const id = x => x;

const comp = f => g => x => f(g(x));

const thisify = f => f({});

const delayTask = f => ms => x =>
  Task((res, rej) => setTimeout(comp(res) (f), ms, x));
  
const log = x => (console.log(x), x);

const sqr = x => x * x;

// MAIN

const tx = delayTask(id) (500) (5);

const main = taskMap(sqr) (tx);

main.task(log); // logs 25
```
[run code](https://repl.it/@scriptum/CookedSlowAutoresponder)

### Functors are composable

Functors have a very important property: They do compose by design. This means we can compose effectful contexts of different type, just like they occur in the real world. We usually don't face something simple as a varying number of values in an array. In a more realistic scenario we face an asynchronous computation that may produce a varying number of values in an array or nothing at all. Let us see how we can model such a computation with composed functors:

```javascript
// TASK

const Task = task => record(
  Task,
  thisify(o => {
    o.task = (res, rej) =>
      task(x => {
        o.task = k => k(x);
        return res(x);
      }, rej);
    
    return o;
  }));

// Functor

const taskMap = f => tx =>
  Task((res, rej) =>
    tx.task(x => res(f(x)), rej));

// auxiliary function

const delay = f => ms => x =>
  Task((res, rej) => setTimeout(x => res(f(x)), ms, x));

// OPTION

const Option = union("Option");

const None = Option("None", {});

const Some = some => Option(Some, {some});

// Functor

const optMap = f => tx =>
  match(tx, {
    None: _ => None,
    Some: ({some: x}) => Some(f(x))
  });

// ARRAY

// Functor

const arrMap = f => xs =>
  xs.map((x, i) => f(x, i));

// MAIN

const asyncFetch1 = delay(xs => Some(xs)) (1000) ([1, 2, 3]);
//                                   ^^ original array
const asyncFetch2 = delay(_ => None) (1500) ();
//                             ^^^^ no array at all

const main1 = taskMap(optMap(arrMap(inc))) (asyncFetch1);
const main2 = taskMap(optMap(arrMap(inc))) (asyncFetch2);

// run the asynchronous computation

main1.task(log); // {some: [2, 3, 4 ], Option: "Option", tag: "Some"}
main2.task(log); // {Option: "Option", tag: "None"}
```
[run code](https://repl.it/@scriptum/EnormousCooperativeFormula)

The nested functor application `taskMap(optMap(arrMap(inc)))` is all it takes to lift the pure `inc` function into the described contexts. However, `inc` is only a contrived example. The decisive point is that every pure function can be lifted in any meaningful functor composition. It is the ability to compose what make functors so incredible useful. As soon as the functor interface is extended by applicative we can even lift binary or higher n-ary functions into a functorial context. We will learn how to achieve this in a later chapter of this course.

### Editor's note

If you enjoyed this chapter please 🌟 scriptum here on Github or share it on your preferred social media platform. If you found a mistake or inaccuracy or want to propose an improvement please file an issue/feature. Thank you.

[&lt; prev chapter](https://github.com/kongware/scriptum/blob/master/course/ch-013.md) | [TOC](https://github.com/kongware/scriptum#functional-programming-course-toc) | [next chapter &gt;](https://github.com/kongware/scriptum/blob/master/course/ch-015.md)
