## Composing Effects with Monad Transformers

Monadic effect composition is one of the more difficult topics of the functional paradigm and quite frankly, it is a bit hackish and still too ad-hoc. It needs a lot of experience to apply the technique properly. Prepare to get your hands dirty in this chapter.

### Monads do not compose in general

As opposed to functors and applicatives monads of different type do not compose, that is, there is no general, mechanical way to combine any two monads so that the result is always a new, lawful monad. We cannot just write:

```
// mmx has type M<N<A>> where M and N are monads of different type

chain1(mmx) (mx => // M layer
  chain2(mx) (x => // N layer
    ...));
```
Some compositions will not work at all. Others will break the monad laws and behave unexpectedly.

The problem lies in the way monads are capable of interleaving their effects. 

***

has to do with the way the different effect layers `M` and `N` are interleaved. We can reproduce it by applying monadic actions to functors, where `M` is of type array and `N` of type `Option`:

```javascript
// unoin constructor

const union = type => (tag, o) =>
  (o[type] = type, o.tag = tag.name || tag, o);

const match = (tx, o) =>
  o[tx.tag] (tx);

// OPTION

const Option = union("Option");

const None = Option("None", {});

const Some = some => Option(Some, {some});

// functor

const optMap = f => tx =>
  match(tx, {
    None: _ => None,
    Some: ({some: x}) => Some(f(x))
  });

// ARRAY

// functor

const arrMap = f => xs =>
  xs.map((x, i) => f(x, i));

// MAIN

const foo = s => [Some(s.toUpperCase())]; // monadic action

const ttx = [Some("foo")];

arrMap(optMap(foo)) (ttx); // [Some<[Some<string>]>]
```
[run code](https://repl.it/@scriptum/NavyNovelScale)

Without joining the effects `M<N<M<N<A>>>>` are interleaved. Now it is impossible to join any `M` and any `N` in a general manner. The only thing we could do would be a transformation to `M<M<N<N<A>>>>` but that would require cummutativity for the involved monads.

### Higher order monads to the rescue

If there is no general solution to this problem, maybe we can find a less general, more ad-hoc one. We could simply write all our monad compositions by hand, of course, but that would clearly violate the DRY principle. But maybe we are able to implement a specialized version of each monad that takes another monad of any type and always returns a law-abiding, new combined monad. These class of monads would probably have two other important characteristics:

* there is no one-to-one relationship between a specialiced monad and its regular counterpart
* there might not be a specialized monad for every regular monad

Such a class of specialiced monads does exist. They are called monad transformers. A monad transformer is itself a monad that takes another monad as its argument and returns a law-abiding, new combined monad. We have seen this construct before: Transformers are higher order monads.

Transformers are also ad-hoc and thus a bit hackish and awkward to use. These are the reasons why effect composition is still under active research and a couple of alternative approaches have emerged. I will cover these approaches in later chapters of this course.

### Transformers under the hood

A higher order monad `T` that represents one possible implementation of a transformer for the underlying monadic type `M` constitutes itself at the type level through a specific implementation of `chain` and `of`, where both operations take the corresponding operations of another monad `N` of different type:

```javascript
const ofT = ofN => ...
const chainT = chainN => ...
```
It is important to understand that the transformer `T` must comply with the following two rules:

* `T` must not use or reference `M`'s `chain`/`of` operations in any way
* `T` must not know anything about `N` except that it is also a monad

This is likely to become clearer if we replace the type variables with actual types. Say, if `M` is an array, then `T` implements the array monad transformer. `T` must not know anything about both `M` and `N` except that `M` is of type array and `N` is another type and both implement the monad type class. Both rules make sense, because in spite of the name a monad transformer is a new, completely independent monad and it should work with any monad that is passed to it.

The monad `N`, which is passed to the transformer as an argument, is called the base monad. It constitutes the outer monad of the combined type, whereas the transformer constitutes the inner monad: `M<T<A>>`. However, this only holds for the term and type level, not so much for the effect level.

From the perspective of the combined effects there is no clear separation but effects are interleaved in a more or less complex fashion. The only general observation you can make is that the effect of the inner monad and thus the monad transformer is the dominant one. It transforms the effect of the outer one.

### Monad transformer stacks

The monad transformer mechanism is composable, i.e. you can take a partially applied monad transformer and apply it to another one. In functional programming jargon this forms a monad transformer stack. Just like for a single monad transformer the innermost monad determines the dominant effect of the stack.

Please note that the transformer stack we are going to build in the following sections is rather contrived. I want you to solely focus on the mechanics of the effect composition rather than on the question if a particularly transformer stack is useful in practice.

#### `EitherT`/`Array`


#### Illegal `ArrayT`/`Either`

* proof lawlessness with non-commutative base monad
* how to determine if a monad is non-commutative

#### Legal ~~`ArrayT`~~`ListT`/`Either`

* proof lawfulness with non-commutative base monad

#### `OptionT`/`Task`


#### `OptionT`/`TaskT`/`Array`


#### `OptionT`/`TaskT`/`ArrayT`/`Trampoline`

* `ArrayT` is still useful along with commutative base-monads

#### `WriterT`/`Trampoline`


#### `TaskT`/`Trampoline`

* demonstrate stack-safety of post-recursion with the `Trampoline` monad
* not sure yet if it actually works

### Generalized lifting

* polymorphic `lift` function

### Transformers in the wild

* Kleisli arrows are monad transformers where an arbitrary outer monad is composed with the function monad

### Alternative approaches

#### Pre-composed monads

* you can write your own hard-coded monad composition

#### Continuation monad encodings

* every monad transformer can be encoded with the continuation monad

***

#### `OptionT`/`Array`

Here comes our first monad transformer stack `[Option<A>]`. `OptionT` is the transformer and `Array` the base monad:

```javascript
// union constructor

const union = type => (tag, o) =>
  (o[type] = type, o.tag = tag.name || tag, o);

const match = (tx, o) =>
  o[tx.tag] (tx);

// OPTION

const Option = union("Option");

const None = Option("None", {});

const Some = some => Option(Some, {some});

// Transformer

const optChainT = ({chain, of}) => mmx => fmm =>
  chain(mmx) (mx =>
    match(mx, {
      None: _ => of(None),
      Some: ({some: x}) => fmm(x)
    }));

const optOfT = of => x => of(Some(x));

// ARRAY

// Monad

const arrChain = mx => fm =>
  arrFold(acc => x =>
    arrAppend(acc) (fm(x))) ([]) (mx);

const arrOf = x => [x];

// transformer stack

const optArrChain = optChainT(
  {chain: arrChain, of: arrOf});

const optArrOf = optOfT(arrOf);

// auxiliary functions

const arrFold = f => init => xs => {
  let acc = init;
  
  for (let i = 0; i < xs.length; i++)
    acc = f(acc) (xs[i], i);

  return acc;
};

const arrAppend = xs => ys =>
  xs.concat(ys);

const arrCons = x => xs =>
  [x].concat(xs);

// MAIN

const mmx = [Some(10), Some(20), Some(30)],
  mmy = [Some(0), Some(2), Some(3)];
  
const main =
  optArrChain(mmx) (x =>
    optArrChain(mmy) (y =>
      y === 0 ? [None] // A
        : x % y !== 0 ? [] // B
        : optArrOf(x / y)));

main; // [None, Some(5), None, Some(10), None, Some(15), Some(10)]
```
[run code](https://repl.it/@scriptum/PaleStrictTraining)

The example above exhibits two interleaved effects. The first one consists in `None` values that encode the division-by-zero error (line `A`). The second one consists in a non-deterministic length of the array due to filtered quotients including a fraction (line `B`). 

Please note that usually each monad transformer has its own type wrapper. However, in an untyped environment like Javascript I refrain from doing so. Without a static type system the increased type safety is disproportionate to the continuous wrapping and unwrapping.

#### Illegal `ArrayT`/`Option`

Monat transformers are not commutative, i.e. the interaction of two effects can be controlled by picking a specific stack order. On the one hand the `OptionT`/`Array` stack constitutes an non-deterministic array of independent, optional values, that is, if a single computation inside the array does not yield a result, only this very element becomes `None`. On the other hand the `ArrayT`/`Option` stack constitutes an optional non-deterministic array, that is, if a single computation inside the array does not yield a result, the entire array is dropped and replaced by `None`:

```javascript
// ARRAY

// Transformer

const arrChainT = ({map, ap, of ,chain}) => mmx => fmm =>
  chain(mmx) (mx => {
    const go = ([x, ...xs]) =>
      x === undefined
        ? of([])
        : ap(map(arrCons) (fmm(x))) (go(xs));

    return chain(go(mx)) (ys => of(arrFold(arrAppend) ([]) (ys)));
  });

const arrOfT = of => x => of([x]);

// OPTION

// Functor

const optMap = f => tx =>
  match(tx, {
    None: _ => None,
    Some: ({some: x}) => Some(f(x))
  });

// Applicative

const optAp = tf => tx =>
  match(tf, {
    None: _ => None,
    Some: ({some: f}) => {
      return match(tx, {
        None: _ => None,
        Some: ({some: x}) => Some(f(x))
      });
    }
  });

const optOf = x => Some(x);

// Monad

const optChain = mx => fm =>
  match(mx, {
    None: _ => None,
    Some: ({some: x}) => fm(x)
  });

// transformer stack

const arrOptChain = arrChainT(
  {map: optMap, ap: optAp, of: optOf, chain: optChain});

const arrOptOf = arrOfT(optOf);

// auxiliary functions

const arrFold = f => init => xs => {
  let acc = init;
  
  for (let i = 0; i < xs.length; i++)
    acc = f(acc) (xs[i], i);

  return acc;
};

const arrAppend = xs => ys =>
  xs.concat(ys);

const arrCons = x => xs =>
  [x].concat(xs);

// MAIN

const mmx = Some([10, 20, 30]),
  mmy = Some([1, 2, 3]),
  mmz = Some([0, 2, 3]);

const main =
  arrOptChain(mmx) (x => {
    return arrOptChain(mmy) (y => {
      return y === 0 ? None
        : x % y !== 0 ? Some([])
        : arrOptOf(x / y)})});

const main2 =
  arrOptChain(mmx) (x => {
    return arrOptChain(mmz) (z => {
      return z === 0 ? None
        : x % z !== 0 ? Some([])
        : arrOptOf(x / z)})});

main; // Some([10, 5, 20, 10, 30, 15, 10])
main2; // None
```
[run code](https://repl.it/@scriptum/DiligentOtherDebugmonitor)

Both examples clearly illustrate the differences. However, `ArrayT`/`Option` is not even a valid monad, because it requires the base monad to be commutative, which `Option` happens to be. Let us look at another example where I use another array as the base monad for the sake of simplicity:

```javascript
// MAIN

const foo = x =>
  x === 0
    ? [[0, 1]]
    : [[0], [1]];

console.log(
  arrArrChain(arrArrChain(foo(0)) (foo)) (foo));
    // yields [[0,1,0,0,1],[0,1,1,0,1],[0,1,0,0],[0,1,0,1],[0,1,1,0],[0,1,1,1]]


console.log(
  arrArrChain(foo(0)) (x => arrArrChain(foo(x)) (foo)));
    // yields [[0,1,0,0,1],[0,1,0,0],[0,1,0,1],[0,1,1,0,1],[0,1,1,0],[0,1,1,1]]
```
[run code](https://repl.it/@scriptum/NutritiousRowdyWearables)

Array is not commutative monad hence the results differ and the monad associative law is broken. You may wonder why I do not present the right implementation - because I do not know it. I am not sure if with an strictly evaluated array it is possible at all to come up with a lawful solution. Implementing new, lawful monad transformer is hard and you should give yourself some time to gain experience.

#### Lawful `ListT`/`Option`

TODO

#### `TaskT`/`OptionT`/`Array`

TODO

#### `ArrayT`/`Either`

Warning: I will cheat in this section. Insteafd of the lawful linked list based transformer stack I am going to use the invalid `ArrayT` implementation, because it is close enough for the purpose of iluustration in the context of this course. `ListT` is just too complex and would contradict this very purpose.

```javascript
```
[run code]()

* add short circuit semantics to the transformer stack

#### `OptionT`/`Trampoline`

```javascript
```
[run code](https://repl.it/@scriptum/FrizzyWornFormulas)

* add stack-safety to the transformer stack
* `Trampoline` does not have a transformer

***

* [run code](https://repl.it/@scriptum/FelineLoyalCache) `OptionT`/`Eff`
* [run code](https://repl.it/@scriptum/ClumsyDullApplicationframework) `OptionT`/`EffT`/`Array`
* [run code](https://repl.it/@scriptum/WarpedBeigeNumerators) `OptionT`/`Array`
* [run code](https://repl.it/@scriptum/JumboTrickyActivecontent) `ArrayT`/`Option`
* [run code](https://repl.it/@scriptum/OrganicWheatMisrac) `ArrayT`/`Option` (stack overflow)
* [run code](https://repl.it/@scriptum/NutritiousRowdyWearables) `ArrayT`/`Option` (invalid)
* [run code](https://repl.it/@scriptum/MoralAuthorizedComputergames) `ListT`/`Option` (done right)
* [run code](https://repl.it/@scriptum/DefiniteLastFiles) `EitherT`
