## Data Modeling with Algebraic Data Types (ADTs)

**[Editor's note: this chapter is currently under edit]**

Modeling data in functional programming means to compose simple types to arbitrarily complex composite ones, while these types have a strong foundation in math. The goal of this chapter is to give you a first impression of this approach and its mathematical roots.

### A short OOP detour

As opposed to object oriented programming data and behavior are strictly decoupled from each other in the functional paradigm. This has two major advantages:

* it allows functions to be stateless and thus globally declared
* it leads to more explicit data dependencies in general

Instead of writing statements and assigning intermediate results to variables a functional programmer composes functions - not only unary pure ones but all kinds of functions. The resulting compositions have a strict order caused by data dependencies between the involved functions.

### Algebraic data types

Algebraic data types are the only means necessary in the functional paradigm to construct all kinds of composite data structures. Not surprinsingly they are composable and may have recursive definitions. The following sections cover the most important ADT classes.

#### Sum types

A sum type, also known as tagged union, can have alternative shapes called variants, where only a single variant can exist simultaneously. Variants are tagged in order to distinguish them from one another at runtime. Scriptum supplies the `union` auxiliary function to facilitate the construction of tagged unions in Javascript:

```javascript
const union = type => (tag, o) =>
  (o[type] = type, o.tag = tag.name || tag, o);

const Bool = union("Bool"); // type constructor

// value constructors

const False = Bool("False", {});
const True = Bool("True", {});

False; // {Bool: true, tag: "False"}
True; // {Bool: true, tag: "True"}
```
The `Bool` tagged union type from the above example can either be `True` or `False`. Please note that the `Bool` property is required, because in the second part of this course we will use scriptum along with Typescript. Such a property allows Typescript's strutural type system to distinguish different union types with an accidentally identical structure.

Here is another tagged union which includes `None` and `Some<A>` as variants. It is a more explicit and less error prone alternative to Javascript's `null` type:

```javascript
const Option = union("Option"); // type constructor

// value constructors

const None = Option("None", {});
const Some = some => Option(Some, {some});

None; // {Option: true, tag: "None"}
Some(5); // {Option: true, tag: "Some", some: 5}
```
#### Product types

A product type has only one shape but can group several data fields, which are independent of one another. Scriptum supplies the `record` auxiliary function to facilitate the construction of product types in Javascript:

```javascript
const record = (type, o) =>
  (o.type = type.name || type, o);

const Point = x => y => record(Point, {x, y});

Point(1) (2); // {Point: true, x: 1, y, 2}
```
`Point<A, A>` contains two fields with values of the same type.

#### Void type

The `Void` type has no inhabitants, i.e. it has no value. We cannot express such a type in Javascipt due to the lack of a static type system. The closest thing we can get is only partially applying scriptum's union type constructor:

```javascript
const Void = union("Void");
```
Since there is no value constructor we cannot construct a value of type `Void`. This seems to be absurd, but later in this chapter we will use `Void` to demonstrate the algebra of ADTs.

#### Unit type

The `Unit` type has exactly one inhabitant:

```javascript
const Unit = record("Unit", {});
```
Javascript's native unit types are `null` and `undefined`.

#### The algebra of ADTs

What exactly is the algebra of algebraic data types? We can use algebraic expressions to precisely describe them:

* `+` Sum
* `*` Product
* `0` Void
* `1` Unit
* `X`/`Y` Singleton

Let us see how we can express various ADTs with the underlying algebra:

```
Bool         = True    | False            ~ 1 + 1
Option<A>    = None    | Some<A>          ~ 1 + X
Either<A, B> = Left<A> | Right<B>         ~ X + Y
Point<A, A>                               ~ X * X
List<A>      = Nil     | Cons<A, List<A>> ~ 1 + X * List<A>
```
It turns out that every valid ADT can be expressed in algebraic notation and the result of this expression is the cardinality of the type, i.e. how many inhabitants it has. The names of ADT classes simply reflect the arithmetic operation that is used to determine the cardinality of possible types of this class. `X`/`Y` are placeholders that can be replaced with the number of values of their type, as soon as this type is actually provided. Moreover, the `List` ADT includes a recursive type definition.

#### Do the algebraic laws hold?

Let us verify if the algebraic identity law holds for ADTs?

```javascript
// 0 + x = x

const Foo = union("Foo");

const Bar = x => Foo("Bar", Void);
const Bat = x => Foo("Bat", {x});

Bar(123); // no value
Bat(123); // Foo {x: 123}
```
We can only construct `Foo` values of the `Bat` variant, hence `0 + X = X` holds.

```javascript
// 0 * x = 0

const Foo = y => record("Foo", {x: Void, y});

Foo(123); // no overall value, because the `x` property has no value
```
We cannot construct a single `Foo` value, hence `0 * a = 0` holds. For the sake of simplicity I will not verify the other algebraic laws for addition/multiplication. This section might have been a bit handwavy, but please bear my attempt in mind to address a non-mathatical audiance as well.

### When to use sums and when to use products?

Sums are the dual of products but when do we choose one over the other? We can state the following as a rule of thumb:

* if two data components are interdependent, a sum type should be used to avoid invalid combinations
* if two data components are independent of each other a product type should be used to allow all combinations

A computation that may fail can either yield a result value or an error message. Both data components depend on each other, because they are mutually exclusive:

left | right | valid
---- | ----- | ------
string | null | true
null | data | true
string | data | false
null | null | false

We rule out invalid states by encoding this data structure as a sum type:

```javascript
const Either = union("Either");

const Left = left => Either(Left, {left}); // error case
const Right = right => Either(Right, {right}); // right case

const safeDiv = x => y =>
  y === 0
    ? Left("division by zero")
    : Right(x / y);
    
safeDiv(2) (6); // Either {tag: "Right", right: 3}
safeDiv(2) (0); // Either {tag: "Left", left: "division by zero"}
```
Using `Either` only valid combinations of the involved data components are possible.

Here is another example with data components which are completely independent of each other:

```javascript
const Time = h => m => s => record(Time, {h, m, s});

Time(11) (59) (59); // {Time: true, h: 11, m: 59, s: 59}
```
All combinations of hours, minutes and seconds are valid. The number of possible combinations is only limited by the product of the three data fields `Time<Nat, Nat, Nat> ~ Nat * Nat * Nat`. Hence we encode the data structure using a product type.

### Sums of products

The last examples were quite simple and rather contrived. If we compose sums and products to more complex compositions a pattern naturally evolves: A sum of products or alternatives of records to put it another way. If we recap that sum types offer a choice by declaring alternative value constructors and each constructor can form a product type by expecting more than one argument are the natural result.

Let us examine a simple example of a sum of product, which additionally includes a recursive definition: The `List` type:

```javascript
const List = union("List");

const Nil = List("Nil", {});
const Cons = head => tail => List(Cons, {head, tail});

const listFold = f => acc => {
  const go = tx =>
    match(tx, {
      Nil: _ => acc,
      Cons: ({head, tail}) => f(head) (go(tail))
    });

  return go;
};

const listSum = listFold(x => acc => x + acc) (0);

const tx = Cons(1) (Cons(2) (Cons(3) (Nil)));

listSum(tx); // 6
```
[run code](https://repl.it/@scriptum/TerribleRoughSorting)

`List` consists of the sum of its two data constructors `Nil` and `Cons` where the latter is a product type, because it expects two arguments. The cardinality of `List` is calculated by `List<A> ~ 1 + X * List<A>`. As you can see the type is defined in terms of itself. Recursive type definitions are a very powerful mechanism to define more complex types.

In the next example I demonstrate the power of the sums of products pattern by encoding the idea of either or both as an ADT:

```javascript
const Triple = x => y => z => [x, y, z];

const These_ = union("These");
const This = _this => These_(This, {this: _this});
const That = that => These_(That, {that});
const These = _this => that => These_(These, {this: _this, that});

// ARRAY

const arrAlign = f => xs => ys => {
  const go = (acc, i) => {
    if (i >= xs.length && i >= ys.length)
      return acc;

    else if (i >= ys.length)
      return go(arrSnoc(acc) (f(This(xs[i]))), i + 1);

    else if (i >= xs.length)
      return go(arrSnoc(acc) (f(That(ys[i]))), i + 1);

    else
      return go(arrSnoc(acc) (f(These(xs[i]) (ys[i]))), i + 1);
  };

  return go([], 0);
};

const arrSnoc = xs => x =>
  (xs.push(x), xs);

const Pair = x => y => [x, y];

// polymorphic align/zip functions

const liftAlign = align => f => x => y =>
  align(tx =>
    match(tx, {
      This: ({this: x_}) => f(x_) (y),
      That: ({that: y_}) => f(x) (y_),
      These: ({this: x_, that: y_}) => f(x_) (y_)
    }));

const zipPad = align => liftAlign(align) (Pair);

const liftAlign3 = align => f => x => y => z => xs => ys =>
  align(tx =>
    match(tx, {
      This: ({this: [x_, y_]}) => f(x_) (y_) (z),
      That: ({that: z_}) => f(x) (y) (z_),
      These: ({this: [x_, y_], that: z_}) => f(x_) (y_) (z_)}))
        (zipPad(align) (x) (y) (xs) (ys));

const zipPad3 = align => liftAlign3(align) (Triple);

// MAIN

const main = zipPad3(arrAlign) ("") (0) (false);

main(
  ["foo", "bar"])
    ([2, 4, 6, 8])
      ([true, true]); // [["foo", 2, true], ["bar", 4, true], ["", 6, false], ["", 8, false]]
```
[run code](https://repl.it/@scriptum/FocusedDeepCodeview)

Do not be intimidated by the complexity of this algorithm. It requires quite a bit of experience to understand or even write such an extendable composition. This course will hopefully help you to get there. The cardinality of `These<A, B>` is calculated by `These<A, B> ~ X + Y + X * Y`.

### The curse of hierarchies

Imagine a language that only allows the definition of new data types in a way that you cen merely add information in order to model the world. How would such a model look like? In the following example we start with a data structure `Foo`. Later we realize that we sometimes need another data component. We can either add information to `Foo` or create a new data type. Since sometimes both data components have to be grouped we extend `Foo`:

```javascript
class Foo {
  constructor(x) {this.x = x}
}

class Bar extends Foo {
  constructor(x, y) {super(x); this.y = y}
}

Bar(123, "abc");
Bar(123, null); // ouch
```
With data types we only can add information to we inevitably wind up with inflexibe type hierarchies, which tend to be inadequate to model the real, chaotic world.

### ADTs with lazy property access
***

I use plain old Javascript objects to define ADTs. Javascript object properties are eagerly evaluated but we can benefit from lazy getters to create ADTs with lazy property access semantics:

```javascript
const lazyProp = (k, v) => o =>
  Object.defineProperty(o, k, {
    get: function() {delete o[k]; return o[k] = v()},
    configurable: true,
    enumerable: true});

const Lazy = lazy =>
  record(Lazy, lazyProp("lazy", lazy) ({}));

const log = x => (console.log(x), x);

const main = Lazy(() => log(2 * 3));

// nothing logged so far

main.lazy + main.lazy; // logs 6 once and yields 12
//          ^^^^^^^^^ subsequent access
```
[run code](https://repl.it/@scriptum/GlisteningPalegreenAnalyst)

`main.lazy` is only evaluated when needed and only once. All subsequent accesses resort to the initially computed result.

### Pattern matching

Functions that expect tagged unions must always consider all possible cases in order to work reliably. Pattern matching is a unification algorithm along with local bindings and special syntax that guarantees case exhaustiveness. It is one of a few techniques that cannot be accomplished in userland but needs to be implemented on the language level.

Unfortunately Javascript does not ship with pattern matching, hence we have to resort to folds, which represent the elimination rule of a type and to auxiliary functions like `match`:

```javascript
const match = (tx, o) =>
  o[tx.tag] (tx);
    
const Option = union("Option");

const None = Option("None", {});
const Some = some => Option(Some, {some});

const option = none => some => tx =>
  match(Option, tx, {
    None: _ => none,
    Some: ({some: x}) => some(x)
  });

const main = option(0) (x => x * x);

main(None); // 0
main(Some(5)); // 25
```
[run code](https://repl.it/@scriptum/BogusFullButtons)

`match` only works with tagged unions and it does not prevent us from supplying non-exhaustive patterns. This will change as soon as we start working with Typescript.

### Editor's note

If you enjoyed this chapter please 🌟 scriptum here on Github or share it on your preferred social media platform. If you found a mistake or inaccuracy or want to propose an improvement please file an issue/feature. Thank you.

[&lt; prev chapter](https://github.com/kongware/scriptum/blob/master/course/ch-004.md) | [TOC](https://github.com/kongware/scriptum#functional-programming-course-toc) | [next chapter &gt;](https://github.com/kongware/scriptum/blob/master/course/ch-006.md)
