## Statically Combining Effects with a Pure Function using Applicative

**[Editor's note: this chapter needs to be revised]**

Functor is an incredible general and useful algebraic structure but it lacks an important ability: We cannot lift a binary or other n-ary functions into `n` effectful contexts or in other words we cannot combine several effects with a function. When we try anyway we get stuck with functions in an effectful context:

```javascript
const arrMap = f => xs =>
  xs.map((x, i) => f(x, i));
  
const add = x => y => x + y;

arrMap(add) ([1, 2, 3]); // [f, f, f]
```
`Functor` has no means to further apply these functions, because `map` expects a single pure function not a collection of partially applied ones.

### Extending functor by applicative

Let us extend the `Functor` type class by deducing a subclass with two additional properties. This new type class is called `Applicative` and encodes the algebraic structure of applicative functors.

#### `of` operation

```javascript
const of = x => /* function body */;
```
`of(x)` puts a pure value `x` into an effectful context without actually performing the effect. The operation is fully polymorphic in `x`. You can think of such an effectful context as a context where the occurance of an effect is possible.

`of` resembles `empty` of the `Monoid` type class. As `empty` represents the identity element of a type, which has no effect when combined with another valiu of the same type, `of` creates the identity context of an applicative type, which has no effect when applied to another value of the same applicative.

#### `ap` operation and the applicative pattern

```javascript
const ap = tf => tx => /* function body */;
```
`ap` is a left-associative binary function that takes a partially applied pure function `tf` in an effectful context `t` and a value `tx` in the same context, applies `f` to `x` within `t` and returns the result value again wrapped in `t`. Depending on the effectful context there can be none, exactly one or many `x` values inside `t`.

Since `ap` expects a function within an effectul context, we must compose an `f` with `map` to get an `ft`. This composition forms the so called applicative pattern: `ap(map(f) (tx)) (ty)`.

We can compose several `ap` operations to combine `n` effectful contexts with an `n`-ary function, as long as all contexts are of the same type: `ap(ap(map(f) (tx)) (ty)) (tz)`.

#### Applicative laws

These are the laws every applicative instance must abide by:

```
~ denotes equivalence
f denotes a pure function
x denotes a pure value
tx denotes a value in an effectful context

ap(of(id)) (tx) ~ tx // identity
ap(of(f)) (of(x)) ~ of(f(x)) // homomorphism
ap(tx) (of(y)) ~ ap(of(f => f(y))) (tx) // interchange
ap(ap(ap(of(comp)) (tx)) (ty)) (tz) ~ ap(tx) (ap(ty) (tz)) // composition
```
### The two notions of expressions

There are two distinct notions of expressions in functional programming. An expression like `[1, 2, 3]` can be interpreted as

* as a collection of values of natural numbers
* as a non-deterministic computation that may contain none, one or many values

The first point is the notion of expressions as values. The second point is the notion of expressions as computations. Depending on what notion we pick we get completely different results:

```javascript
const arrAppend = xs => ys =>
  (xs.push.apply(xs, ys), xs);

const arrMap = f => xs =>
  xs.map((x, i) => f(x, i));

const arrAp = tf => xs =>
  arrReduce((acc, x) =>
    acc.concat(
      arrMap(x => f(x)) (xs)))
        ([])
          (tf);

// value notion
arrAppend([1, 2]) ([3, 4]); // [1, 2, 3, 4]

// computation notion
arrAp(
  arrMap(x => y => [x, y])) // A
    ([1, 2]) ([3, 4]); // [[1, 3], [1, 4], [2, 3], [2, 4]]
```
With the first application we just append two collection, which yields the union of both collections. The second application,  however, yields all combinations of two non-deterministic computations. Please note that while the entire composition represents a non-deterministic computation, the array returned by the lambda in line `A` is again treated as a value. Mind-bending, right?

An applicative or the underlying functor respectively turns an ordinary value into a computation with a specific effect. You can think of applicative functors as semantics machines or little embedded effect-specific languages.

### Static combination of contexts

Every context affects its value(s) in a certain way. The non-deterministic context, for instance, either contains none, one or many values. The crucial property of applicative functors is that they perform the effect of its context exactly ONCE, without exception. If you combine two non-deterministic computations `xs`/`ys` with a binary pure function `f` by applying `ap(map(f) (xs)) (ys)`, the non-determinism of both contexts is combined. You cannot ignore the first or the last one or apply either of them twice. In other words the combination of applicative contexts is static and deterministic. You can determine from the source code in what manner the contexts will be combined, because it is completely mechanic:

```javascript
// Functor

const arrMap = f => xs =>
  xs.map((x, i) => f(x, i));

// Applicative

const arrAp = tf => tx =>
  arrFold(acc => f =>
    arrAppend(acc)
      (arrMap(x => f(x)) (tx)))
        ([])
          (tf);

// auxiliary functions

const comp = f => g => x => f(g(x));

const arrFold = f => init => xs => {
  let acc = init;
  
  for (let i = 0; i < xs.length; i++)
    acc = f(acc) (xs[i], i);

  return acc;
};

const arrAppend = xs => ys =>
  (xs.push.apply(xs, ys), xs);

const add = x => y => x + y;

// MAIN

const xs = [1, 2, 3],
  ys = [0, 20, 300];

comp(arrAp)
  (arrMap(add))
    (xs)
      (ys); // [1, 21, 301, 2, 22, 302, 3, 23, 303]
```
[run code](https://repl.it/@scriptum/HotpinkShamelessLoopfusion)

We start with the applicative pattern consisting of `map` and `ap`. Next we pass the array values or rather the non-deterministic computations to this composition. Usually we cannot determine the length of theses arrays, because they are non-deterministic, but we can anticipate that the resulting array will always be the cartesian product of both inputs. Hence we can calculate the result length by means of `xs.length * ys.length`. No matter what the pure function does with the values inside the arrays we will always end up with a result array of the same shape, namely with exactly `xs.length * ys.length` elements. The effect of each context is performed exactly once.

The effect a context can have on its value(s) is not limited to quantity. Every context has its own effect, often a rather subtle one. This is the part that renders applicative functors so general and hard to grasp. If you have understood the context of a specific applicative instance you are far from having understood the concept in general. On the one hand it is hard to draw a general conclusion when you start from a specific applicative functor. On the other hand it is hard to envision the variety of completely different contexts when you start from an abstract description.

From the perspective of the pure function `f` the entire applicative computation is completely opaque. It does neither know anything about the context and how  many of them it is lifted in, nor does it have control over the type class operations `ap` and `of`. Consequently `f` cannot modify a single property of the context but only the value(s) inside. It is fully polymorphic on the context.

### Applicative at the type level

If Typescript would support higher-order type constructors the applicative operations would have the following types:

```
// hypothetical type
type op = <F, A>(x: A) => F<A>;
type ap = <F, A, B>(tf: F<(x: A) => B>) => (tx: F<A>) => F<B>;

// This is function application but inside a functorial context F

          <   A, B>( f:   (x: A) => B ) => ( x:   A ) =>   B ;
```
The type level unlocks the view to the mechanical nature of applicative. In `F<(x: A) => B>` the function `(x: A) => B` is inside the effectful context `F`, that is, it is not aware of `F` at all. It cannot influence how often it is called or produce a context itself. 

Let us compare applicative lifting with functor and function application to show the symmetry of these types:

```
<   A, B>( f:   (x: A) => B ) => ( x:   A ) =>   B ; // function application
<F, A, B>( f:   (x: A) => B ) => (tx: F<A>) => F<B>; // functor lifting
<F, A, B>(tf: F<(x: A) => B>) => (tx: F<A>) => F<B>; // applicative lifting
```
#### Type-level monoid

TODO

### Abstracting from nested application

`ap` expects only two arguments. If we want to combine more than two contexts we have to build a call tree of nested `ap` applications. Fortunately, applicative computations are static so we can easily abstract from the nested structure with a family of arity aware combinators:

```javascript
const liftA4 = ({map, ap}) => f => tw => tx => ty => tz =>
  ap(ap(ap(map(f) (tw)) (tx)) (ty)) (tz);
  
const main = liftA4(
  {map: arrMap, ap: arrAp})
    (w => x => y => z => [w, x, y, z]);
    
main(
  [1, 2])
    (["a", "b"])
      ([true, false])
        ([[], {}]); // [[1, 'a', true, []], ...]
```
[run code](https://repl.it/@scriptum/WhirlwindLightcyanEmacs)

`main` applied to four arrays yields the cartesian product of the involved arrays in form of an array of 4-tuples. The `liftA4` combinator is ad-hoc polymorphic and works with any applicative functor. Let us drop the type class constraints and rearrange/rename a few arguments to direct the attention to the essential computational structure:

```javascript
const apply4 = v => f => w => g => x => h => y => i => z =>
  i(h(g(f(v) (w)) (x)) (y)) (z);

const applyr4 = v => f => w => g => x => h => y => i => z =>
  f(v) (g(w) (h(x) (i(y) (z))));

const sub = x => y => x - y;

apply4(1)
  (sub) (2)
    (sub) (3)
      (sub) (4)
        (sub) (5); // ((((1 - 2) - 3) - 4) - 5) === -13

applyr4(1)
  (sub) (2)
    (sub) (3)
      (sub) (4)
        (sub) (5); // (1 - (2 - (3 - (4 - 5)))) === 3

```
[run code](https://repl.it/@scriptum/EverlastingTechnoSymbols)

Applicative computations are just compositions of binary functions under the hood. There are two meaningful ways to compose such functions: Either left or right associative. Applicative uses the former. In a subsequent chapter we will see that there is another meaningful way to compose binary functions - the monadic way.

### Applicative evaluation order

If we want to examine the dependencies and the possible evaluation order of several applicative computations, we have to distinguish the value and effect level. If we have two applicative computations `F` and `G`, then `G`'s result value may depend on `F`'s result value and `G`'s effect may depend on `F`'s effect but there can never be a dependency between current values and previous effects or current effects and previous values.

It gets even harder. `F` and `G` must not even form a sequence but can also run in parallel. This assumes that there is no inter-value or inter-effect dependency of course. In this case each applicative represents an independent operation. The evaluation order of combined applicative computations depends on the specific instance. It may either have no order at all, because it runs in parallel, it may run in sequence or in whatever order the particular instance determines. Consequently the evaluation order of applicative computations is not always deterministic.

### `Option` instance

If the effect an applicative context has on its value(s) must be performed exactly once does this mean we cannot short circuit an applicative computation? Strictly speaking yes, unless the instance implementation of `ap` itself provides this capability:

```javascript
// OPTION

const Option = union("Option");

const None = Option("None", {});
const Some = some => Option(Some, {some});

// Functor

const optMap = f => tx =>
  match(tx, {
    None: _ => None, // short circuiting
    Some: ({some: x}) => Some(f(x))
  });

// Applicative

const optOf = x => Some(x);

const optAp = tf => tx =>
  match(tf, {
    None: _ => None, // short circuiting
    Some: ({some: f}) => {
      return match(tx, {
        None: _ => None, // short circuiting
        Some: ({some: x}) => Some(f(x))
      });
    }
  });

// auxiliary functions

const comp = f => g => x => f(g(x));
const add = x => y => x + y;

// MAIN

comp(optAp)
  (optMap(add))
    (Some(2))
      (Some(3)); // Some(5)
      
comp(optAp)
  (optMap(add))
    (None)
      (Some(3)); // None
```
[run code](https://repl.it/@scriptum/CyanCuddlyOrganization)

Looking at the `Option` type whenever the computation comes upon the `None` case the whole applicative computation is short circuited and the pure function (namely `add` in our example) is never evaluated. `Option` captures computations that may not yield a result at all. The type makes this effect explicit and forces you to always handle both cases when dealing with such circumstances.

### Function instance

`ap` of the function instance does not include short circuiting, hence we cannot break out of such a computation. The function applicative supplies the notion of a computation with a read-only environment. It is a special case because the context is just lambda abstraction and its application:

```javascript
// FUNCTION

// function composition

const comp = f => g => x => f(g(x));

// constant combinator

const _const = x => _ => x;

// Functor

const funMap = comp;

// Applicative

const funOf = _const;

const funAp = tf => tg => x =>
  tf(x) (tg(x));

// auxiliary functions

const add = x => y => x + y;
const sqr = x => x * x;

// MAIN

funAp(funMap(add) (sqr)) (sqr) (3); // 9 + 9 == 18
funAp(add) (sqr) (3); // 9 + 3 == 12
```
[runccode](https://repl.it/@scriptum/NiftyColossalRar)

With functions we do not need the applicative pattern but can provide the bare function to `ap`. Is this an unprincipled application? No, because `ap` expects a value wrapped in a context. Our value is an unary function `y => x` and the context is another functional layer. If we nest unary function abstractions we wind up with the curried form `x => y => x`. A binary curried function provides sufficient context for an applicative computation. If we ignore the second argument we obtain `_const`, which happens to be `of` of the function instance, because it represents its most minimal context.

In the example above we used predefined arithmetic functions to build an applicative computation. Usually we use a lambda:

```javascript
const liftA4 = ({map, ap}) => f => tw => tx => ty => tz =>
  ap(ap(ap(map(f) (tw)) (tx)) (ty)) (tz);

const id = x => x;
const inc = x => x + 1;
const neg = x => -x;
const sqr = x => x * x;

liftA4({map: funMap, ap: funAp})
  (w => x => y => z => [w, x, y, z])
    (id)
      (neg)
        (inc)
          (sqr)
            (3); // [3, -3, 4, 9]
```
[run code](https://repl.it/@scriptum/NoteworthyLovingCode)

No matter what we do we cannot break out of the applicative computation:

```javascript
liftA4({map: funMap, ap: funAp})
  (w =>
    w === 0
      ? _ => _ => _ => [] // we still have to go through the entire computation
      : x => y => z => [w, x, y, z])
        (id)
          (neg)
            (inc)
              (sqr)
                (0); // []
```
[run code](https://repl.it/@scriptum/DarkseagreenQuixoticPi)

All we can do is to ignore arguments but we have to apply the `_ => _ => _ => []` lambda anyway.

### Applicatives compose

Since applicatives are functors they compose, i.e. we can compose contexts and their effects. I want to take the chance and demonstrate the process of abstracting in functional programming on the following a bit more complex example. We start with the most detailed encoding and then try to abstract from boilerplate and common patterns.

When we combine composed/nested applicatives like `Task(Some([1, 2, 3]))` and `Task(Some([4, 5, 6]))`, we have to deal with the applicative pattern `ap(map(f) (x)) (y)`, which renders the process quite complex and cumbersome:

```javascript
taskAp(
  taskMap(x => y =>
    optAp(
      optMap(x_ => y_ =>
        arrAp(
          arrMap(add) (x_)) (y_)) (x)) (y));
```
This is the applicative operation to handle an async computation that may fail or yields any number of results. We can get rid of the lambdas by using point-free style:

```javascript
taskAp(
  taskMap(
    comp(optAp)
      (optMap(
        comp(arrAp)
          (arrMap(add)))));
```
The point-free encoding removes some boilerplate to direct the view to the applicative pattern. We can use the `liftA` function family to abstract from this pattern:

```javascript
comp3(
  tLiftA2)
    (optLiftA2)
      (arrLiftA2)
        (add);
```
The above implementation is pretty easy to read. Let us put everything together to see how it works:

```javascript
// polymorphic lift

const liftA2 = ({map, ap}) => f => tx => ty =>
  ap(map(f) (tx)) (ty);

// TASK

const Task = task => record(
  Task,
  thisify(o => {
    o.task = (res, rej) =>
      task(x => {
        o.task = k => k(x);
        return res(x);
      }, rej);
    
    return o;
  }));

// Functor

const taskMap = f => tx =>
  Task((res, rej) =>
    tx.task(x => res(f(x)), rej));

// Applicative

const taskAp = tf => tx =>
  Task((res, rej) =>
     tf.task(f =>
       tx.task(x =>
         res(f(x)), rej), rej));

const taskLiftA2 = liftA2({map: taskMap, ap: taskAp});

const taskOf = x => Task((res, rej) => res(x));

// OPTION

// Applicative

const optLiftA2 = liftA2({map: optMap, ap: optAp});

// ARRAY

// Applicative

const arrLiftA2 = liftA2({map: arrMap, ap: arrAp});

// auxiliary functions

const thisify = f => f({});
const comp3 = f => g => h => x => f(g(h(x)));

// MAIN

const tttx = taskOf(optOf([1, 2, 3])),
  ttty = taskOf(optOf([10, 20, 30])),
  tttz = taskOf(None);

const main = comp3(
  tLiftA2)
    (optLiftA2)
      (arrLiftA2)
        (add)
          (tttx)
            (ttty);

const main2 = comp3(
  tLiftA2)
    (optLiftA2)
      (arrLiftA2)
        (add)
          (tttx)
            (tttz);

main.task(x => x); // Task(Some([11, 21, 31, 12, 22, 32, 13, 23, 33]))
main2.task(x => x); // Task(None)
```
[run code](https://repl.it/@scriptum/ValidBlushingVolume)

As you can see applicative functors allow as to combine two composed contexts/effects. As I have mentioned before the thrilling feature of applicatives as well as normal functors is their generality. We can apply them to a variety of composed applicative types and they will always work as expected. This means we can reuse functions that operate within contexts and their effects. We gained another level of reusability.

### Applicative monoids

Every applicative that is a monoid in its type parameter, i.e. contains monoidal values forms itself a monoid in a mechanic fashion:

```javascript
// ad-hoc polymorphic functions

// Applicative

const liftA2 = ({map, ap}) => f => tx => ty =>
  ap(map(f) (tx)) (ty);

// Monoid

const appmAppend = ({liftA2, append}) => tx => ty =>
  liftA2(append) (tx) (ty);

const appmEmpty = ({of, empty}) =>
  () => of(empty());

// NUMBER

// Monoid under addtion

const sumAppend = x => y => x + y;

const sumEmpty = () => 0;

// MAIN

const main = appmAppend(
  {liftA2: arrLiftA2, append: sumAppend});

const main2 = appmAppend(
  {liftA2: arrLiftA2, append: sumAppend});

main([1, 2, 3])
  ([10, 20, 30]); // [11, 21, 31, 12, 22, 32, 13, 23, 33]

main2([1, 2, 3])
  (appmEmpty({of: arrOf, empty: sumEmpty}) ()); // [1, 2, 3]
```
[run code](https://repl.it/@scriptum/TimelyVibrantCybernetics)

Please note that the `appm` prefix of `appmAppend`/`appmEmpty` stands for applicative monoid. We could have make a `AppMonoid` type wrapper but since scriptum pursues dictionary passing style and thus can have multiple monoid instances per data type, we just skip the type boilerplate.

### Editor's note

If you enjoyed this chapter please 🌟 the repo here on Github or share it on your preferred social media platform. If you found a mistake or inaccuracy or want to propose an improvement please file an issue/feature. Thank you.

[&lt; prev chapter](https://github.com/kongware/scriptum/blob/master/course/ch-015.md) | [TOC](https://github.com/kongware/scriptum#functional-programming-course-toc) | [next chapter &gt;](https://github.com/kongware/scriptum/blob/master/course/ch-019.md)
