## Algebraic Structures, Properties and Lambda Abstractions

Functonal programming is based on a number of mathematical structures, properties and laws. Its strong foundation in math is actually the most fundemantal difference to other paradigms.

### What is an algebraic structure?

An algebraic structure in functional programming is a set of operations on data types and a set of properties/laws these operations must satisfy. The structure is called algebraic, because it comes from math or abstract algebra respectively. But why would we use algebraic structures in programming in the first place? Because they are far more general and predicatable than those structures human intuition usually comes up with.

### Which are the algebraic properties?

Here is an incomplete list of basic algebraic properties/laws that are required by various algebraic structures:

* Absorption
* Associativity
* Commutativity
* Distributivity
* Idempotency
* Identity
* Inverse
* Monotonicity
* Transitivity
* etc.

There are other more specific laws that only apply to a few or a single algebra. Some of the applicative functor laws, for example:

* Homomorphism
* Interchange
* Composition

In the following sections I am going to introduce the most important laws.

#### Associativity

Associativity relaxes the order operations are evaluated in:

```
(x op y) op z = x op (y op z) // infix operator notation
f(f(x) (y)) (z) = f(x) (f(y) (y)) // prefix function notation
```
This is an extremely useful feature of the functional paradigm, because it enables the evaluation of operations out of their lexical order and thus in parallel, for instance. As you can read from the equation above only operators/functions that have the same type in both their operands/arguments and result value can be associative.

The associative property must not be confused with operator associativity, though. Function composition on the one hand is associative:

```javascript
const comp = f => g => x => f(g(x));
const sub = x => y => x - y;
const inc = x => x + 1;
const sqr = x => x * x;

comp(comp(sqr) (inc)) (sub(10)) (5); // 36
comp(sqr) (comp(inc) (sub(10))) (5); // 36
```
The composition operator on the other hand is left associative, at least this applies to Haskell and other functional languages. Hence `f ∘ g ∘ h` is parsed as `(f ∘ g) ∘ h`. Please note that I use the `comp` function since Javascript does not ship with an infix composition operator.

#### Commutativity

While associativity renders order irrelevant at the level of operations, commutativity goes even further and drops the requirement at the operand level by allowing to swap them:

```
x op y = y op x
f(x) (y) = f(y) (x)
```
The commutative is stronger than the associative property but there are also far less algebraic structures that respect it, e.g. addition or multiplication.

#### Idempotency

Idempotency relaxes the exactly-once to a at-least-once semantics:

```
f(x) = f(f(x))
```
Some operations are overall idempotent (add or remove an element in a set/map, round a number to a certain decimal place, sort). Others are idempotent if one of the operands is the identity element (add a number to zero, multply a number with one).

Idempotency is often an issue in the context of mutations and reassignments. Please note that I use a less formal variant of idempotency to demonstrate the effect in practice:

```javascript
const cons = x => xs =>
  [x].concat(xs);
  
const cons_ = x => xs =>
  (xs.unshift(x), xs);

const xs = [2, 3],
  ys = [2, 3];

cons(1) (xs); // [1, 2, 3]
cons(1) (xs); // [1, 2, 3]
cons_(1) (ys); // [1, 2, 3]
cons_(1) (ys); // [1, 1, 2, 3]
```
#### Identity

When talking about identity we need to distinguish elements from functions. Identity elements are those elements within an operation that preserve the identity of the other operand/argument. Here are a few examples:

```javascript
add(2) (0) === 2;
//      ^
mul(2) (1) === 2;
//      ^
concat("foo") ("") === "foo";
//             ^^
concat([1, 2]) ([]) === [1, 2];
//              ^^
all(true) (true) === true;
//         ^^^^
any(true) (false) === true;
//         ^^^^^
compare(LT) (EQ) === LT;
//           ^^
compare(GT) (EQ) === EQ;
//           ^^
```
The identity function preserves the identity of its argument:

```javascript
const id = x => x;
const map = f => xs => xs.map(f);

id(123) === 123;
id("foo") === "foo";
map(id) ([1, 2, 3]) === [1, 2, 3];
```
There are many others. It is hard to explain why identity is a useful property as it is hard to explain the purpose of `0`. If you stick to functional programming you will come across various situations where identity is absolutely necessary.

### Lawless lambda abstractions

First of all, most abstractions in the functional paradigm are function encodings. Exceptions like pattern matching or do-notation do confirm this rule. A lawful lambda abstraction has to abide by algebraic properties. However, except for dependently typed languages no current type system is sophisticated enough to enforce them. It is just a convention.

So is every abstraction that does not follow algebraic laws lawless? By no means! As a matter of fact for many function abstractions there do not exist a meaningful law. You may consider such abstractions less significant or elegant, but they can still be useful in practice. In order to be lawless an abstraction must meet one of the following criteria:

* it has no type (applies only to untyped environments, of course)
* it resembles an algebraic structure but violates its laws

Although lawless abstraction sounds like the fella you wanna hang out with, they are harmful as they obfuscate the intention of your code.

### Why lambda abstractions matter

Lambda abstractions are useful for various reasons. Here is an incomplete list:

#### Code reuse

As functional programmers we always strive to find small, reusable functions to keep our code DRY. Instead of writing a bunch of only slightly different sorting functions we write a single one that takes the order as an argument: 

```javascript
const sortBy = comparator => xs =>
  xs.sort((x, y) => comparator(x) (y));

const flip = f => y => x => f(x) (y);

const compOn = f => g => x => y =>
  f(g(x)) (g(y));

const fst = ([x, y]) => x;

const asc = x => y =>
  x < y ? -1
    : x > y ? 1
    : 0;

const desc = flip(asc);

sortBy(asc)
  ([2, 9, 5, 0, 1, 6, 4, 8, 3, 7]); // [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]
  
sortBy(desc)
  ([2, 9, 5, 0, 1, 6, 4, 8, 3, 7]); // [9, 8, 7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, 0]

sortBy(compOn(asc) (fst))
  ([[2, "world"], [3, "!"], [1, "hello"]]); // [[1, "hello"], [2, "world"], [3, "!"]]

sortBy(compOn(desc) (fst))
  ([[2, "world"], [3, "!"], [1, "hello"]]); // [[3, "!"], [2, "world"], [1, "hello"]]
```
[run code](https://repl.it/@scriptum/FakeImperturbableFinance)

#### Reduce boilerplate

If we recognize a great amount of simple, verbose and recurring code,

```javascript
const Option = "Some";
const Some = some => ({type: "Option", tag: "Some", some});
const None = some => ({type: "Option", tag: "None"});

const head = xs =>
  xs.length === 0
    ? None
    : Some(xs[0]);

// library code ^^^

const xs = [5, 7, 9],
  tx = head(xs);
  
let x;

switch (tx.tag) {
  case "Some":
    x = tx.some;
    break;
  
  case "None":
    x = 0;
    break;
}

// 11 LOC
```
we try to abstract from it with functions:

```javascript
const union = type => (tag, o) =>
  (o[type] = type, o.tag = tag.name || tag, o);

const match = (tx, o) =>
  o[tx.tag] (tx);

const Option = union("Option");
const None = Option("None", {});
const Some = some => Option(Some, {some});

const head = xs =>
  xs.length === 0
    ? None
    : Some(xs[0]);

// library code ^^^

const xs = [5, 7, 9];

const x = match(head(xs), {
  Some: ({some}) => some,
  None: _ => 0
});

// 5 LOC
```
#### Handle state

Instead of storing state with `const` or mutable state with `let` assignments, we hold it in the function call stack:

```javascript
const arrScan = f => x => xs => {
  const go = (y, i) =>
    xs.length === i
      ? [y]
      : [y, ...go(f(y) (xs[i]), i + 1)];
  
  return go(x, 0);
};

arrScan(
  x => y => x + y) (0)
    ([1, 2, 3, 4, 5]); // [0, 1, 3, 6, 10, 15]
```
[run code](https://repl.it/@scriptum/PrestigiousDisguisedKeyboard)

Although we track a lot of state in the example above only a single assignment for the auxiliary function is used. Everything else is held in the call stack. This idea scales and if you are concerned about stack overflow I will introduce trampolines in another chapter.

#### Convert statements into expressions

We want statements as first class entities to be able to pass them around like data, hence we convert them into expressions by wrapping them in functions:

```javascript
const app_ = x => f => f(x);
const o = {foo: ...};

app_(o) (({foo}) => {
  switch(foo) {
    case ...: return ...;
    case ...: return ...;
    case ...: return ...;
    default: return ...;
  }
});
```
This way we do not lose the concise and familiar syntax.

#### Avoid explicit lambdas

Explicit lambdas may be helpful to increase the readability of code. However, sometimes they are just not necessary:

```javascript
const id = x => x;
const comp = f => g => x => f(g(x));

const reduce = f => acc => xs =>
  xs.reduce((acc, x) => f(acc) (x));

// library code ^^^

const compn_ = fs => x =>
  fs.reduce((y, f) => f(y), x);
//          ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

const compn = fs =>
  reduce(comp) (id);
```
We successfully abstracted from an explicit lambda, reduced the syntactic noise and rendered the code more declarative.

#### Utilize partial application

Operators, for instance, are not partially applicable in Javascript, hence we replace them with corresponding curried functions:

```javascript
const map = f => xs =>
  xs.map(x => f(x));
  
const mul = x => y => x * y;

map(mul(10));
```
### Rule of least complexity

It is crucial in functional programming to create simple functions that are focuced on a single concern. The following function violates this demand:

```javascript
const lengths = xs =>
  xs.map(x => xs.length);
```
Instead we split `lengths` into two functions:

```javascript
const map = f => xs =>
  xs.map(f);
  
const len = s => s.length;

map(len) (["f", "fo", "foo"]); [1, 2, 3]
```
### Abstraction trade-off

The process of abstraction in programming is evolutionary and mainly depends on the skill level of you and your coworkers. We can regularly add another level of abstraction to code. While abstracting in general increases code quality and reduces boilerplate, it also makes it harder for other parties to comprehend your intentions, because you trade details for less accessibility. What is boilerplate for one person is a necessary detail for another. It is just a matter of experience.

### Editor's note

If you enjoyed this chapter please 🌟 scriptum here on Github or share it on your preferred social media platform. If you found a mistake or inaccuracy or want to propose an improvement please file an issue/feature. Thank you.

[&lt; prev chapter](https://github.com/kongware/scriptum/blob/master/course/ch-003.md) | [TOC](https://github.com/kongware/scriptum#functional-programming-course-toc) | [next chapter &gt;](https://github.com/kongware/scriptum/blob/master/course/ch-005.md)
